Update Routing docs main page (#19700)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/routing.md

title: Routing
---

> Part of what makes Gatsby sites so fast is that a lot of the work is done at build time and the running site is using mostly [static content](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#static-pages). Specifically, each page is its own HTML file that's generated at build time. During that process, Gatsby creates paths to access those files, handling routing for you. Navigating in a Gatsby app requires understanding what those paths are and how they're generated.

Reviewer: Perhaps we want to clarify that we only load the HTML file for the initial page the user visits?

Author: Ya, I went back and forth on this one. I don't want to get too far into the implementation and confuse users. The text still reads true for me, since we create all the files and generate the paths, even if we don't use all of them in that manner.
Perhaps removing the entire "Specifically," sentence and just mentioning that Gatsby creates paths at build time?

> Part of what makes Gatsby sites so fast is that a lot of the work is done at build time and the running site is using mostly [static content](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#static-pages). Specifically, each page is its own HTML file that's generated at build time. During that process, Gatsby creates paths to access those files, handling routing for you. Navigating in a Gatsby app requires understanding what those paths are and how they're generated.

Author: ```suggestion
Part of what makes Gatsby sites so fast is that a lot of the work is done at build time and the running site is using mostly [static content](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#static-pages). Specifically, each page is its own HTML file that's generated at build time. During that process, Gatsby creates paths to access those files, handling routing for you. Navigating in a Gatsby app requires an understanding of what those paths are and how they're generated.
```

> Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication, transactions, or form submission. To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using `@reach/router` which is built into Gatsby.

Reviewer 2: I'm a little unsure about using transactions and form submissions as examples, since the static pages are rehydrated they can still technically fire off requests to other services client-side. 

Maybe using an example like: 
```suggestion
Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication or routes for dynamic content like products in a database (e.g. `/products/:productId`). To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using `@reach/router` which is built into Gatsby.
```

Not sure what's best 🤔

> Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication or retrieving dynamic content. To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using `@reach/router` which is built into Gatsby.

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication or retrieving dynamic content. To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using [`@reach/router`](/docs/reach-router-and-gatsby/) which is built into Gatsby.
```

> Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication or routes for dynamic content like products in a database (e.g. `/products/:productId`). To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using `@reach/router` which is built into Gatsby.

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, your application may include functionality that cannot be handled at build time or through [rehydration](/docs/adding-app-and-website-functionality/#how-hydration-makes-apps-possible). This includes things like authentication or retrieving dynamic content. To handle those pages, you can make use of [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) using `@reach/router` which is built into Gatsby.
```

### Pages defined in `src/pages`

Each `.js` file inside `src/pages` will generate its own page in your Gatsby site. The path for those pages matches the file structure it's found in.

For example, `contact.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/contact`. And `home.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/home`. This works at whatever level the file is created. If `contact.js` is moved to a directory called `information`, located inside `src/pages`, the page will now be found at `yoursite.com/information/contact`.

The exception to this rule is any file named `index.js`. Files with this name are matched to the root directory they're found in. That means `index.js` in the root `src/pages` directory is accessed via `yoursite.com`. However, if there is an `index.js` inside the `information` directory, it is found at `yoursite.com/information`.

Note that if no `index.js` file exists in a particular directory that root page does not exist, and attempts to navigate to it will land you on a [404 page](/docs/add-404-page/). For example, `yoursite.com/information/contact` may exist, but that does not guarantee `yoursite.com/information` exists.

> ### Pages created with `createPages` hook

Reviewer 3: The code uses `createPage`, so we should be more explicit here
```suggestion
### Pages created with `createPage` action
```

> Another way to create pages is in your `gatsby-node.js` file using the `createPages` hook. When pages are defined this way the path is explicitly set. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another way to create pages is in your `gatsby-node.js` file using the `createPage` action, a JavaScript function. When pages are defined this way, the path is explicitly set. For example:
```

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
createPage({
  path: "/routing",
  component: routing,
  context: {},
})

> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```
For more information on this action, visit the [`createPage` API documentation](/docs/actions/#createPage).
````

## Conflicting Routes

> Since there are multiple ways to create a page, different plugins, themes, or sections of code in your `gatsby-node` file may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be.

Reviewer 3: Should we add a note on how to fix conflicting routes?
```suggestion
Since there are multiple ways to create a page, different plugins, themes, or sections of code in your `gatsby-node` file may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be. Changing any conflicting paths to produce unique URLs should clear up the problem.
```

## Nested Routes

> If your goal is to define paths that are multiple levels deep, that can be done directly when creating pages as mentioned in [Creating routes](#creating-routes).

Reviewer 3: I feel like an example would help here. Does this reflect what you meant?
```suggestion
If your goal is to define paths that are multiple levels deep, such as `/portfolio/art/item1`, that can be done directly when creating pages as mentioned in [Creating routes](#creating-routes).
```

> Alternatively, if you want to create pages that will display different subcomponents depending on the URL path, Gatsby handles that at the page level using [layouts](/docs/layout-components/).

Reviewer 3: Does this work as an example?
```suggestion
Alternatively, if you want to create pages that will display different subcomponents depending on the URL path (such as a specific sidebar widget), Gatsby can handle that at the page level using [layouts](/docs/layout-components/).
```

## Linking between routes

In order to link between pages, you can use [`gatsby-link`](/docs/gatsby-link/). Using `gatsby-link` gives you built in [performance benefits](#performance-and-prefetching).

Alternatively, you can navigate between pages using standard `<a>` tags, but you won't get the benefit of prefetching in this case.

## Creating authentication-gated links

For pages dealing with sensitive information, or other dynamic behavior, you may want to handle that information server-side. Gatsby lets you create [client-only routes](/docs/client-only-routes-and-user-authentication) that live behind an authentication gate, ensuring that the information is only available to authorized users.

## Performance and Prefetching

> In order to improve performance, Gatsby looks for links that appear on the current page to perform prefetching. Before a user has even clicked on a link, Gatsby has started to fetch the page it points to. [More on prefetching](/docs/how-code-splitting-works/#prefetching-chunks)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to improve performance, Gatsby looks for links that appear on the current page to perform prefetching. Before a user has even clicked on a link, Gatsby has started to fetch the page it points to. [Learn more about prefetching](/docs/how-code-splitting-works/#prefetching-chunks).
```

See the [Creating and Modifying Pages](/docs/creating-and-modifying-pages) for more detail.

When Gatsby creates pages it automatically generates a path to access them. This path will differ depending on how the page was defined.

### Pages defined in `src/pages`

Each `.js` file inside `src/pages` will generate its own page in your Gatsby site. The path for those pages matches the file structure it's found in.

> For example, `contact.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/contact`. And `home.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/home`. This works at whatever level the file is created. If `home.js` is moved to a directory called `information`, located inside `src/pages`, the page will now be found at `yoursite.com/information/contact`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, `contact.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/contact`. And `home.js` will be found at `yoursite.com/home`. This works at whatever level the file is created. If `contact.js` is moved to a directory called `information`, located inside `src/pages`, the page will now be found at `yoursite.com/information/contact`.
```

I think this (or the last part: `youtsite.com/information/contact`) would need to be swapped so they match 🙂

The exception to this rule is any file named `index.js`. Files with this name are matched to the root directory they're found in. That means `index.js` in the root `src/pages` directory is accessed via `yoursite.com`. However, if there is an `index.js` inside the `information` directory, it is found at `yoursite.com/information`.

> Note that if no `index.js` file exists in a particular directory that root page does not exist, and attempts to navigate to it will land you on a [404 page](/docs/add-404-page/). For example, `yoursite.com/information/contact` may exist, but that does not guaruntee `yoursite.com/information` exists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that if no `index.js` file exists in a particular directory that root page does not exist, and attempts to navigate to it will land you on a [404 page](/docs/add-404-page/). For example, `yoursite.com/information/contact` may exist, but that does not guarantee `yoursite.com/information` exists.
```

### Pages created with `createPages` hook

Another way to create pages is in your `gatsby-node.js` file using the `createPages` hook. When pages are defined this way the path is explicitly set. For example:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
createPage({
  path: "/routing",
  component: routing,
  context: {},
})
```

## Conflicting Routes

> Since there are multiple ways to create a page, someone may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since there are multiple ways to create a page, different plugins, themes, or sections of code in your `gatsby-node` may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be.
```

Maybe spelling out the possible perpetrators makes sense here?

> Since there are multiple ways to create a page, different plugins, themes, or sections of code in your `gatsby-node` may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be.

Author: ```suggestion
Since there are multiple ways to create a page, different plugins, themes, or sections of code in your `gatsby-node` file may accidentally create multiple pages that are meant to be accessed by the same path. When this happens, Gatsby will show a warning at build time, but the site will still build successfully. In this situation, the page that was built last will be accessible and any other conflicting pages will not be.
```

## Nested Routes

> If your goal is to define paths that are multiple levels deep, that can be done directly when creating pages as mentioned in above section [Creating routes](#creating-routes).

Author: ```suggestion
If your goal is to define paths that are multiple levels deep, that can be done directly when creating pages as mentioned in the above section [Creating routes](#creating-routes).
```
